A trolley is coming for five people, and you're in position to switch its course towards an individual. The conflict between doing the right thing and remaining innocent poses an interesting moral dilemma. 

Now imagine that a mustachioed villain sees that there is one person on each track, notes the current position of the switch, and ties 4 more people to the death track. It's a clearer choice now to flip the switch in order to stop the villain in his tracks. We're no longer fighting the natural state of the universe, we're fighting an individual.

Now imagine that the villain didn't note the current position of the switch. He figures that each person tied to the track counts for half villain points if there's a 50% chance that they get killed, and he doesn't bother to investigate further. Since he chooses effectively at random, does he now count as the universe operator in the first prompt? Or does he count as the villain operator on the basis of his intent? 

Or was he always a universe operator? His intent is villainy, but was it his intent to be someone with that intent? Some number of steps back, we start encountering external, universal forces that directly manipulate the villain's actions. The villain was innocent once, but then all of his family was killed off, he was stomped on again and again, he suffered under a cruel universe, and he grew a mustache. He is a product of his environment. If he is responsible, how could we rule out blaming the trolley, blaming the person who laid the track, blaming the victims for being in the wrong place and/or at the wrong time?

And are you a universe operator? You've lead your life in the same universe as Waluigi, you've seen your own difficulties, and now you're in a position to operate for a force bigger than yourself. Are you responsible for the decision you're about to make, or does the pre-existence of the dilemma absolve you from blame regardless of the choice you make?

Alternately:

Andrew has worked out a perpetual motion device. But he's wrong about a couple concepts, his prototype doesn't work. So he goes to tell his friend Barry about it. While he's talking to Barry, he makes a few mistakes that misconvey his idea. Perhaps he says "magnet" when he means "electromagnet", perhaps "toaster" instead of "microwave"- he doesn't do it intentionally, he's not even aware that he's done it. But what he conveys is a description of a working perpetual motion device. So Barry puts it together and it works. If you ask a witness to the conversation who invented the device, they'll say Andrew. If you ask Barry, he'll say Andrew. But Andrew knows he didn't invent a working device, he would never have been able to do it without Barry taking control of the project. 

So perhaps the answer lies in Andrew's brain. Which neurons caused the accidents that generated a functional machine? Surely those neurons are responsible for the invention. But they have no internal notion of the whole that they work towards. A neuron that represented toasters fired off when it was signalled, and a neuron that represented microwaves failed to. Those neurons are stupid, they did the wrong thing. To credit them for inventing a physics-defying nonsense machine is to overvalue them. 

Morality is predicated on a system of cause and effect. The universe works on a system of cause and cause and cause and cause and effect and effect and effect and effect. The two refuse to mesh. 

Plenty of regularly observable events in the universe have no cause. A system at equilibrium remains at equilibrium not because of the actions of individual particles, but because of chaos and statistics. A system tends towards entropy not because some point of energy grows more chaotic over time, but because the collective energy 